# yum

## [清华源](https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/help/centos-stream/)
```bash
# 备份
# cp /etc/yum.repos.d/centos.repo /etc/yum.repos.d/centos.repo.bak
# cp /etc/yum.repos.d/centos-addons.repo /etc/yum.repos.d/centos-addons.repo.bak
```

- `centos.repo`:
```
[baseos]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - BaseOS
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/BaseOS/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-baseos-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=1

[baseos-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - BaseOS - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/BaseOS/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-baseos-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[baseos-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - BaseOS - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/BaseOS/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-baseos-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[appstream]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - AppStream
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/AppStream/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-appstream-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=1

[appstream-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - AppStream - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/AppStream/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-appstream-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[appstream-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - AppStream - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/AppStream/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-appstream-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[crb]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - CRB
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/CRB/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-crb-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=1

[crb-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - CRB - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/CRB/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-crb-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[crb-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - CRB - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/CRB/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-crb-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0
```

- `centos-addons.repo`:
```
[highavailability]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - HighAvailability
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/HighAvailability/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-highavailability-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=0

[highavailability-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - HighAvailability - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/HighAvailability/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-highavailability-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[highavailability-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - HighAvailability - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/HighAvailability/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-highavailability-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[nfv]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - NFV
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/NFV/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-nfv-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=0

[nfv-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - NFV - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/NFV/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-nfv-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[nfv-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - NFV - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/NFV/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-nfv-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[rt]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - RT
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/RT/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-rt-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=0

[rt-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - RT - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/RT/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-rt-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[rt-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - RT - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/RT/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-rt-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[resilientstorage]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - ResilientStorage
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/ResilientStorage/$basearch/os
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-resilientstorage-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=0

[resilientstorage-debuginfo]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - ResilientStorage - Debug
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/ResilientStorage/$basearch/debug/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-resilientstorage-debug-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[resilientstorage-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - ResilientStorage - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/$releasever-stream/ResilientStorage/source/tree/
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-resilientstorage-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-centosofficial
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0

[extras-common]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - Extras packages
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/SIGs/$releasever-stream/extras/$basearch/extras-common
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-extras-sig-extras-common-$stream&arch=$basearch&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-CentOS-SIG-Extras-SHA512
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
countme=1
enabled=1

[extras-common-source]
name=CentOS Stream $releasever - Extras packages - Source
baseurl=https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/centos-stream/SIGs/$releasever-stream/extras/source/extras-common
# metalink=https://mirrors.centos.org/metalink?repo=centos-extras-sig-extras-common-source-$stream&arch=source&protocol=https,http
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-CentOS-SIG-Extras-SHA512
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=0
metadata_expire=6h
enabled=0
```